# Drupal 10 Development
A minimal project build for Drupal 10 module development.

## Contents

* [Getting started](#getting-started)
* [Common tasks](#common-tasks)
* [Sample workflows](#sample-workflows)
* [Developer notes](#developer-notes)
* [Services](#services)

## Getting started

### Requirements
This project requires [DDEV](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/) and [Composer 2](https://getcomposer.org/doc/00-intro.md#installation-linux-unix-macos) be installed before you begin.

### Setup

Checkout the project and run the following commands from project root:

* `ddev start`
* `composer install`
* `ddev auth ssh`

Now you are ready to install Drupal and test modules:

* `ddev install`

This command will install Drupal 10 plus the following useful modules: `devel`, `config_inspector`, `admin_toolbar`, and `admin_toolbar_tools`. You can login with `admin / admin` at https://d10.ddev.site/user.

#### Note on NFS:

If using NFS to speed up the container, see these steps.

* `ddev debug nfsmount` (optional)
  * See the [macOS NFS Setup section](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/install/performance/#nfs) of the DDEV documentation.


### Drush

`drush 11` is installed by default and can be run with `ddev drush COMMAND`. You can use `ddev drush site:install` if you want to customize the install.

### Composer

The use of `composer require` is assumed to be used for maintenance of the core framework, not adding modules for testing.

You can use `composer require` to add modules that you need -- and to check dependencies. Do not commit those additions to the project.

### Install locations

Modules are installed to `web/modules/contrib`, which is leveraged by our [common ddev tasks](#common-tasks).

## Common tasks

We have automated common tasks as ddev commands to reduce dependencies. The following tasks are available.

### ddev check

**Command:** `ddev check MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev check admin_toolbar`

The `check` command will run code reviews using PHPCBF, PHPCS, PHPMD, and PHPStan against the selected module. PHPCBF may change the module's code as part of this action.

These commands can also be run individually as `ddev md`, `ddev sniff`, and `ddev stan`.

Note that PHPStan is pinned to [PHPStan level 2](https://phpstan.org/user-guide/rule-levels) in this command. Use [`ddev stan`](#ddev-stan) to override the level.

### ddev cleanup

**Command:** `ddev cleanup`

Removes test files generated by `ddev test`.

### ddev clone

**Command:** `ddev clone MODULE_NAME [-b BRANCH_NAME | -t TAG_NAME] [-c]`

**Example:** `ddev clone admin_toolbar`

**Example:** `ddev clone workbench_access -c`

**Example:** `ddev clone admin_toolbar -b 8.x-1.x`

**Example:** `ddev clone my_module -o git@github.com:palantirnet`

Use `ddev clone` rather than `composer require` if you want to checkout a git project for development.

The `clone` command will checkout the default branch of the selected module to the `web/modules/contrib` directory.

Use the `-b` or `-t` flags to specify a branch or tag. The flags cannot be used together.

Adding the `-c` flag indicates you are a `project contributor`, not a `project maintainer`. The command will use https rather than ssh to checkout the project. This flag is ignored when using `-o`.

Use the `-o` flag to specify a different origin than drupal.org. The argument is a path to the account that owns the repository (see the example above).

Note that this command will `delete` an existing copy of the module.

### ddev cspell

**Command:** `ddev cspell MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev cspell admin_toolbar`

The `cspell` command runs [CSpell](https://cspell.org/) using the core configuration. Any custom works defined in a module's `.cspell-project-words.txt` file will be added to the ruleset during the check and removed after it completes.

### ddev compat

**Command:** `ddev compat MODULE [-v VERSION]`

**Example:** `ddev compat admin_toolbar`

**Example:** `ddev compat admin_toolbar -v 7.4`

The `compat` command will run PHPCS against the selected module using the `PHPCompatibility` coding standard.

Use the `-v` flag to specify a PHP version to test. By default, the version is `8.3`.

### ddev eslint

**Command:** `ddev eslint MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev eslint admin_toolbar`

**Example:** `ddev eslint admin_toolbar --fix`

The `eslint` command will run core's `eslint` and JS `prettier` profiles against your code. By default, the command runs in report mode. You may pass flags to the command (such as `--fix`) as [documented by eslint](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/use/command-line-interface).

This command will also install the node dependencies required for core development.

This command is adapted from [ddev contrib](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-drupal-contrib/blob/main/commands/web/eslint).

### ddev install

**Command:** `ddev install`

Installs the default drupal site. This command will also install the node dependencies required for core development.

### ddev md

**Command:** `ddev md MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev md admin_toolbar`

The `md` command will run code reviews using PHPMD against the selected module.

### ddev rector

**Command:** `ddev rector MODULE` or `ddev rector MODULE -d` or `ddev rector MODULE --dry-run`

**Example:** `ddev rector admin_toolbar`

**Example:** `ddev rector admin_toolbar -d`

The `rector` command will run Drupal Rector updates against the selected module, potentially rewriting the module's code. Using the `-d` or `--dry-run` flag will not perform the changes, but instead show the suggested changes.

### ddev remove

**Command:** `ddev remove MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev remove admin_toolbar`

The `ddev remove` command will uninstall a module and delete it from the `web/modules/contrib` directory.

### ddev sniff

**Command:** `ddev sniff MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev sniff admin_toolbar`

The `sniff` command will run code reviews using PHPCBF and PHPCS against the selected module. PHPCBF may change the module's code as part of this action.

### ddev stan

**Command:** `ddev stan MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev stan admin_toolbar`

**Example:** `ddev stan admin_toolbar -l 8`

The `stan` command will run code reviews using PHPStan against the selected module.

This command defaults to use [PHPStan level 2](https://phpstan.org/user-guide/rule-levels). You can pass a preferred level (`0-9`, or `max`) using the `-l` flag.

### ddev stylelint

**Command:** `ddev stylelint MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev stylelint admin_toolbar`

**Example:** `ddev stylelint admin_toolbar --fix`

The `stylelint` command will run core's `stylelint` CSS profiles against your code. By default, the command runs in report mode. You may pass flags to the command (such as `--fix`) as [documented by styelint](https://stylelint.io/user-guide/cli).

This command will also install the node dependencies required for core development.


### ddev test

**Command:** `ddev test MODULE`

**Example:** `ddev test admin_toolbar`

**Example:** `ddev test admin_toolbar Functional AdminToolbarAdminMenuTest`

The `ddev test` command runs all tests defined by a module according to Drupal's testing standards.

If you pass the type of test (`Functional, FuntionalJavascript, Kernel, Unit`) and a test class, only tests in that class will be run.

This command uses `testdox` output, which is easy to read but does not provide debugging output.

You can run `testb` with the same parameters to get browser output.

## Sample workflows

Let's assume you want to write a patch for the `workbench_tabs` module. Follow these steps:

### Creating a patch

* `ddev start`
* `composer install`
* `ddev install`
* `ddev clone workbench_tabs`
  * If you are a maintainer, use `ddev clone workbench_tabs -y`
* `ddev test workbench_tabs`
  * Run this step to ensure that existing tests pass.
  * Then run `ddev cleanup` to remove test files.
* `ddev drush en workbench_tabs`
* Now develop your new feature or bugfix in the module
  * Do not check your changes into git before creating the patch.
  * Create a patch
    * `cd web/modules/workbench_tabs`
    * `git diff > ISSUE#-MODULE-summary-COMMENT.patch`
  * Now you can upload the patch to the Drupal.org issue.

### Testing a patch

* `ddev start`
* `composer install`
* `ddev install`
* `ddev clone workbench_tabs`
  * If you are a maintainer, use `ddev clone workbench_tabs -y`
* `ddev test workbench_tabs`
  * Run this step to ensure that existing tests pass.
  * Then run `ddev cleanup` to remove test files.
* `ddev drush en workbench_tabs`
* Download the patch to `web/modules/workbench_tabs`:
  * `cd web/modules/workbench_tabs`
  * `wget https://drupal.org/PATH-TO-FILE/NAME-OF-FILE`
  * `patch -p1 < NAME-OF-FILE`
  * `ddev drush cr`
* Now you can test the patch in the site.

## Developer notes

We are deliberately not using other project dependencies (notably `the-build`, `phing`, and `drupal-skeleton`) on this project. We want this project template to be as independent as possible. This project also does not require integrations with CircleCI and web hosts.

Solr support is not provided by default. It can be added later if needed.

The `main` branch is locked against commits that are not in approved pull requests.


## Services

### Solr server

A solr server is provided at http://drupal-10-development.ddev.site:8983/solr/. To ensure service is ready to be used, restart service using `ddev restart`.

`search_api_solr` server dependency is not currently installed, if you want to test the functionality try this branch [search_api_example](https://github.com/palantirnet/drupal-10-development/tree/search_api_example) or follow these steps.
  * Install `search_api_solr` module:
    * Run `composer require drupal/search_api_solr` to install all dependencies.
    * If you wish to test a branch of that module, then run `ddev clone` to overwrite the composer checkout.
  * Enable the `search_api_solr` module either using the web interface or `ddev drush en -y search_api_solr`
  * Navigate to [Search api page](https://drupal-10-development.ddev.site/admin/config/search/search-api), click "Add server button"
  * Choose Solr as backend.
  * Choose "Standard" as the Solr connector type and configure it:
    * Set "Server name" to anything you want. Maybe `ddev-solr-server`.
    * Set "Backend" to `Solr`
    * Set "Solr host" to `drupal-10-development.ddev.site`.
    * Set "Solr core" name to `dev`.
    * Under "Advanced server configuration" set the "solr.install.dir" to `/opt/solr`.

#### Solr cloud config

The Solr installation is not currently using [cloud config](https://github.com/ddev/ddev-contrib/tree/master/docker-compose-services/solr). Pull requests to add this feature are welcome.
